---
title: "Toward version 1.2: Improvements in SoundCast"
author: Billy Charlton
image: /images/2016/bike-assign-thumb.png
image-wide: 
comments: true
layout: post
tags: [soundcast, tools]
images:
   image1:
      image: /images/2016/bike-assign.png
      caption: "Initial results of brand new bike assignment model. You can see the Burke-Gilman!"
      source: "PSRC SoundCast"
   image2:
      image: /images/2016/externals.png
      caption: "Thousands of daily trips are 'externals'—trips which enter or exit our region."
      source: "PSRC SoundCast"

---

This week we marked a milestone in the continuing development of our activity-based travel model, SoundCast.  The latest official release, [version 1.1](http://localhost:4000/2016/soundcast-1.1), included big improvements to the truck model and the benefit-cost tool. Now, SoundCast "1.2 milestone 1" includes lots of new goodies.

### Improvements in 1.2 milestone 1

**Faster.** Between code improvements and some new server hardware in the closet, we have significantly decreased runtime from 30 hours to 17 hours for a full run. This is mostly [Moore's Law](http://www.economist.com/technology-quarterly/2016-03-12/after-moores-law) in effect: incremental updates in computing power over the three years since our last hardware purchase are responsible for most of the improvement.

**Bike  trips are now assigned to the network.** A completely new bike assignment algorithm is now implemented. The chosen bike routes are informed by auto volumes, amount of uphill climb, and presence of different bike facility types. 

{% include image.html image=page.images.image1 %}

We also have many more bike counts now, with which to validate the results. This model is just a first effort, and more tuning will be coming in the near future.

**Simplified Toll/No-Toll representation.** After extensive review and testing by both PSRC and our consultant team RSG, the toll/no-toll choice has been turned off in SoundCast. This results in:

* Fewer skim matrices
* Fewer modes
* Slight speed improvement

—without any significant loss in capabilities; as the choice of whether to choose a route containing a toll is still embedded in the EMME pathbuilder.

**Big update to "external" trips.** Trips that either originate or end outside of our four-county region are known as "external" trips, and those hadn't been updated in a long, long time. This revision now bases the distribution of the external trips on actual observed behavior from **LEHD flow data** for work trips, which are about 70% of all external trips. We are still working on improvements to the other (nonwork) 30%. 

{% include image.html image=page.images.image2 %}

**Model re-estimation based on 2014/2015 household survey.** Many subcomponents of the travel model have be re-estimated using the latest survey data, including auto ownership, work tour and work-based subtour mode choice, school mode choice, other home-based, and more. Destination choice and day-pattern model re-estimations are still to come.

### Can I use this?

This is just an internal milestone and as such, is not fully tested. You're welcome to [explore the code at GitHub](https://github.com/psrc/soundcast) or download [tag v1.2m1](https://github.com/psrc/soundcast/releases/tag/v1.2m1) locally—everything SoundCast is fully open-source.  The official release of SoundCast 1.2 will occur later this winter, after the model re-estimation, calibration, and validation is complete.


