---
layout: post
author: Milos Balac
title: "PhD position at IFP Energies nouvelles (IFPEN)"
summary: "Towards the creation of a backcasting-oriented
model of mobility systems: Identification of
surrogate models from detailed traffic simulations"
---

An emerging approach is expected to change the way of designing and assessing the future mobility of people
and goods. Whether it will be more electrified, connected, automated, digitalized, or not, it will depend on
which targets we aim to reach at given time horizons: environmental, economic, societal, etc. In the new
paradigm, these targets will be set first, then the most appropriate roadmap of policies and technologies
needed will be established (“backcasting”), as opposed to the current approach where potential actions are
assumed, then their impacts are “forecasted” and assessed. Backcasting can be seen as a dynamic
optimization process (optimal control). It will be enabled by the availability of a system dynamic model that
describes mobility systems in very macroscopic terms yet capable of representing all causality loops linking
the policies sought to the impacts expected.

This doctoral topic represents the first building block of such an ambitious research program, as it targets a
system dynamic model of the transportation network subsystem. A precise definition of manipulable and
exogenous input, internal dynamic states, as well as of significant output variables, shall be the result of a
preliminary, System Dynamics analysis. To identify and quantify the causal dependencies between these
variables, a multimodal transportation network simulator (e.g., MatSim) will be used. Simulation experiments
will be designed and run. The corresponding inputs and outputs variables will be used to construct surrogate
models (the most suitable technique is to be identified) and tune their parameters, to provide the quantitative
dependencies sought. The analysis will focus on different scenarios, to anticipate the effects of exogenous
variables. Different networks or territorial scales will be attempted as well, to investigate the variability of the
transfer functions identified and their scalability. 

**Doctoral School**:	[ED580 - STIC Sciences et Technologies de l'Information et de la Communication](https://www.universite-paris-saclay.fr) 

**Supervisor**:	Dr. Antonio SCIARRETTA, IFP Energies nouvelles, <code>antonio.sciarretta@ifpen.fr</code> 

**PhD location**:	IFP Energies nouvelles, Rueil-Malmaison, France

**Duration and start date**:	3 years, starting in fourth quarter 2023

**Employer**:	IFP Energies nouvelles, Rueil-Malmaison, France

**Academic requirements**:	University Master's degree in Transportation Engineering, Information Engineering, or Artificial Inteligence 

**Language requirements**:	Fluency in English or French, willingness to learn French
	
To apply, please send your cover letter and CV to Dr. Antonio SCIARRETTA.
